---
layout: post
title: Single-Decree Paxos
---

Paxos is a distributed protocol that maintains a log that is kept consistent
between a set of networked computers. Single-Decree Paxos is a slightly simpler
protocol that solves consensus and is used to implement Paxos. Both protocols
were first described by Leslie Lamport in ["The Part-Time
Parliament"][part_time_parliament] and later described more directly in ["Paxos
Made Simple"][paxos_made_simple]. In this article, we describe consensus in
more detail and describe how and why Single-Decree Paxos solves it.

# What is Consensus? #
Assume computers are *fail-stop* and connected by an *asynchronous network*.

- By fail-stop, we assume that any computer can crash at any time, and that any
  crashed computer can restart after any amount of time. When a computer
  crashes, it loses all of the data it is currently operating on, but computers
  can write values to stable storage and can recover these values upon restart.
- By asynchronous, we mean that the network can drop, duplicate, re-order, and
  arbitrarily delay messages. We only assume that the network doesn't corrupt
  messages and that messages are eventually delivered if they are repeatedly
  sent.

Consider a set $\\{a, b, c\\}$ of computers that want to agree on a chosen
value. Some computers propose values, and other computers accept values; some
computers do both. For example, perhaps the computers want to choose a leader.
$a$ could send a message to all three computers proposing that $b$ should be
leader, and all three computers could accept this proposal. The act of a set of
computers choosing a single value is known as *consensus*. In order for a
consensus algorithm to be *safe*, it has to meet a set of rather obvious
conditions whenever it terminates:

- Only one value can be chosen. Duh!
- Only values proposed can be chosen. If this weren't a requirement, you could
  construct a rather silly yet still correct consensus algorithm in which all
  computers instantly agree on some predefined value.

Moreover, it's desirable that a consensus algorithm guarantee some form of
*progress*. The [Fischer, Lynch, Paterson impossibility result][flp] tells us
that no consensus algorithm can guarantee to *always* terminate given fail-stop
machines in an asynchronous network, but we'd still like some promise that a
given consensus algorithm usually terminates after sufficient time given enough
computers haven't crashed. For example, a consensus algorithm that fails to
terminate after a single machine failure doesn't guarantee much progress. On
the other hand, a consensus algorithm that can still operate correctly even
after a minority of computers have failed (e.g. Single-Decree Paxos) guarantees
a stronger notion of progress.

# Why is Consensus Hard? #
Initially, consensus doesn't seem like that hard of a problem. Checking to see
if a boolean formula is satisfiable, finding the minimum number of colors
needed to color a graph, or checking to see if two graphs are isomorphic: these
problems seem tough! Having computers choose *a single value*; seems kinda
easy, huh? Well, it turns out that consensus is tougher than it sounds! To
convince ourselves of this fact, let's consider a couple simple consensus
algorithms we might think of and show why they fail to solve consensus.

Perhaps the simplest algorithm we could think of is to predetermine some leader
which has the exclusive responsibility of choosing the value. Proposers send
their proposals to the leader, and the leader accepts the first value it
receives, deeming it chosen. While this algorithm is surely safe, it doesn't
guarantee much progress. Whenever the leader fails, the algorithm is doomed to
not terminate!

Here's a slightly more complicated algorithm that tries to guarantee a bit more
progress. The main idea is that we can tolerate more machine failures by
sending proposals to more machines. Proposers send proposals to all acceptors,
and all acceptors accept the first value they receive. Whenever a majority of
acceptors accept a proposal, we'll say it's chosen. This algorithm can still
operate even when a minority of machines have crashed; yay! But unfortunately,
if multiple proposers concurrently propose values to acceptors, it is possible
to reach a split vote where no single proposal has a majority of votes. For
example, consider a five machine cluster: $\\{a, b, c, d, e\\}$. Assume $a$,
$c$, and $e$ propose values 1, 2, and 3 respectively. If $a$ and $b$ receive
proposal 1 first, $c$ and $d$ receive proposal 2 first, and $e$ receives
proposal 3 first, then none of proposal 1, 2, or 3 has a majority of
acceptances. Thus, this algorithm can fail to terminate even when no machine
fails!

# Single-Decree Paxos #

[part_time_parliament]: http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/lamport/pubs/lamport-paxos.pdf
[paxos_made_simple]:    http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/lamport/pubs/paxos-simple.pdf
[paxos_wiki]:           https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paxos_(computer_science)
[flp]:                  https://groups.csail.mit.edu/tds/papers/Lynch/jacm85.pdf
